30: Speaking about the future

USING THE PRESENT TENSE TO TALK ABOUT THE FUTURE
You can use the present tense followed by a verbal noun to talk about things that are going to happen in the future, in the same way that you can in English. Here are some examples:

Tá mé ag bualadh le Mark ag a naoi. I am meeting Mark at nine.
Tá Fíona ag teacht ar ais óna saoire amárach. Fíona is coming back from her holidays tomorrow.
Tá mé ag imeacht arís amárach. I am leaving again tomorrow.
THE FUTURE TENSE
Verbs that end in -ann or -eann in the present tense:
You replace the present tense endings with -faidh (after the broad vowels a, o, and u)
or -fidh (after the slender vowels i and e).
ólann sé	he drinks
ólfaidh sé	he will drink
cuireann sí	she puts
cuirfaidh sí	she will put

Verbs that end in -aíonn or -íonn in the present tense:
You replace the present tense endings with -óidh (after the broad vowels a, o, and u)
or -eoidh (after the slender vowels e, and i).
ceannaíonn sí	she buys
ceannóidh sí	she will buy
imíonn siad	they go/leave
imeoidh siad	they will go/leave

THE IRREGULAR VERBS
Here are the future tense forms of some of the irregular verbs:
An rachaidh tú ...?	Will you go ...?
Rachaidh./Ní rachaidh.	Yes I will./ No, I won't.
An mbeidh tú ...?	Will you be ...?
Beidh./Ní bheidh.	Yes, I will./ No, I won't.
An dtabharfaidh tú ...?	Will you give ...?
Tabharfaidh./Ní thabharfaidh.	Yes, I will./ No, I won't.
An bhfaighidh tú ...?	Will you get ...?
Gheobhaidh./Ní bhfaighidh.	Yes I will./ No, I won't.
An bhfeicfidh tú ...?	Will you see ...?
Chífidh./Ní fheicfidh.	Yes, I will./ No, I won't.
An ndéanfaidh tú ...?	Will you do/make ...?
Déanfaidh./Ní dhéanfaidh.	Yes, I will./ No, I won't.
An ndéarfaidh tú ...?	Will you say/tell ...?
Déarfaidh./Ní dhéarfaidh.	Yes, I will./ No, I won't.

It is not Necessary to use personl pronouns - mé, tú, sé, sí, etc. - when answering a question:
An rachaidh Bríd leat?	Will Bríd go with you?
Rachaidh./Ní rachaidh.	Yes, she will./ No, she won't.
OFFERING TO DO SOMEONE A FAVOUR
The future tense is used when offering to do someone a favour.
An gcuirfidh mé an t-im sa chuisneoir duit? Will I put the butter in the fridge for you?
An rachaidh mé go dtí an otharlann leat? Will I go to the hospital with you?
An dtabhairfaidh mé síob duit? Will I give you a lift?
ASKING SOMEONE TO DO YOU A FAVOUR
An bhfaighidh tú páipéar nuachta domh? Will you get a newspaper for me?
An ndéarfaidh tú léi go raibh mé ag cur a tuairisce? Will you tell her that I was asking for her?
An ndéanfaidh tú gar domh? Will you do me a favour?
ASKING ABOUT FUTURE EVENTS
An mbeidh tú sa bhaile amárach?	Will you you be at home tomorrow?
Beidh./Ní bheidh.	I will./I won't.
An bhfeicfidh mé amárach tú?	Will I see you tomorrow?
Chífidh./Ní fheicfidh.	You will./You won't.
An bhfaighidh tú seans a dhul chuig an dráma?	Will you get a chance to go to the play?
Gheobhaidh./Ní bhfaighidh.	I will./I won't.
SAYING WHEN SOMETHING WILL HAPPEN
We came across i gceann in Units 7 and 12. Here are some more examples.
i gceann cúpla lá in a few days' time
i gceann seachtaine in a weeks' time
i gceann coicíse in a fortnight's time

If you want to be less specific you can use:
amach anseo sometime in the future
USING THE WORD MÁ TO TALK ABOUT FUTURE EVENTS
The probablility of future events happening sometimes depends on other factors.
má bhíonn am agam if I have time
má bhíonn an lá go deas if it's a nice day
má théann tú ... if you go ...
má bhíonn lá saor agam if I have a day off
má bhím saor if I'm free
ASKING WHAT THE WEATHER WILL BE LIKE
Cad é an cinéal aimsire a bheidh ann amárach? What will the weather be like tomorrow?
SAYING WHAT THE WEATHER WILL BE LIKE
Beidh sé gaofar. It'll be windy.
Beidh sé fliuch. It'll be wet.
Beidh sé tirim. It'll be dry.
Beidh clocha sneachta ann. There will be hailstones.
Beidh tintreach agus toirneach ann. There will be thunder and lightning.

You can use the word déarfainn (I'd say) if you're not sure what the weather will be like.
Beidh fearthainn throm ann, déarfainn. It'll rain heavily, I'd say. (Literally, There will be heavy rain in it, I'd say.)
