3: Speaking about your background
ASKING SOMEONE WHERE THEY ARE FROM
Cá as tú? Where are you from?
After giving your response, you can ask the same question in the following ways:
Cá as túsa? Where are you from?
or
Cá as tú féin? Where are you from yourself?
SAYING WHERE YOU'RE FROM
Is as ... mé. I'm from ...
Is as Dún Geanainn mé. I'm from Dungannon.

This is generally used as a statement or as a response to a general question such as 'Tell me a little about yourself.' However, when answering a more specific question, such as Cá as tú? people tend to say As and the name of the place.

As Léim an Mhadaidh. From Limavady.
ASKING SOMEONE WHERE THEY LIVE
Cá bhfuil tú i do chónaí? Where do you live?
SAYING WHERE YOU LIVE
Tá mé i mo chónaí i(n)... I live in...
Tá mé i mo chónaí in Aontroim. I live in Antrim.
Tá mé i mo chónaí i nDún Geanainn. I live in Dungannon.
If you are responding to the question Cá bhfuil tú i do chónaí? you can just say, I(n) and the name of the place.

The following sentence will prove useful to you if you don't live in the place you are originally from.
As Ard Mhacha ó dhúchas mé, ach tá mé i mo chónaí i mBeal Feirste anois.
I'm originally from Armagh, but I live in Belfast now.
The Irish for 'in' is i or in.
I is used before words beginning with a consonant, and causes an urú:
i dTír Eoghain
i nDún Dealgan
If the word begins with a vowel, in is used instead:
in Achadh na Chloiche
in Ard Mhacha
TALKING ABOUT LOCATION
You can use the following if you wish to be more precise about where you live:
Tá mé i mo chónaí i lár an bhaile. I live in the centre of town.
... taobh amuigh den bhaile. ... outside the town
... faoin tuath ... in the countryside
... i lár na cathrach ... in the city centre.
sraid street
... ar shráid Anraí ... in Henry Street
bóthar road
... ar Bóthar na Carraige ... on Carrick Road
NA hUIMHREACHA 1-12 NUMBERS 1-12
0	a náid	7	a seacht
1	a haon	8	a hocht
2	a dó	9	a naoi
3	a trí	10	a deich
4	a ceathair	11	a haon déag
5	a cúig	12	a dó dhéag
6	a sé		
In everyday speech the a preceding the numbers is often not pronounced. It is always used, however, after the word uimhir, (number):
uimhir a cúig	number five
ASKING SOMEONE THEIR PHONE NUMBER
Cad é d'uimhir fóin? What's your phone number?
or simply
D'uimhir fóin? Your phone number?
ASKING WHAT TIME IT IS
Cad é an t-am atá sé? What time is it?

If you're asking a stranger you should use the phrase, Gabh mo leithscéal (Excuse me) first in order to attract their attention. If you're already talking to someone you can use the phrase:

Cad é an t-am atá sé, le do thoil? What time is it, please?
SAYING WHAT TIME IT IS
Tá sé ... a chlog. It's ... o'clock.
a haon a chlog
a dó a chlog
a trí a chlog
a ceathair a chlog
a cúig a chlog
a sé a chlog
a seacht a chlog
a hochr a chlog
a naoi a chlog
a deich a chlog
a haon déag a chlog
a dó dhéag a chlog
ceathrú i ndiaidh ... a quarter past ...
leath i ndiaidh ... half past ...
ceathrú go dtí ... a quarter to ...

When you're responding to the question Cad é an t-am atá sé? you can leave out Tá sé ... if you wish and simply say the time.