25: Location and movement part 2

ASKING WHERE SOMETHING IS
You learnt the folllowing in Aonad 15:
Cá bhfuil ...? Where is ...?

Here is a longer more polite version of the question:
An bhfuil a fhios agat cá bhfuil ..?
or
An bhfuil a fhios agat cá háit a bhfuil ..? Do you know where ... is/are?
GIVING DIRECTIONS
Téigh síos an bóthar. Go down the road.
Téigh suas an tsráid. Go up the street.
Tóg an chéad tiontú ar chlé. Take the first turn on the left.
Tóg an dara tiontú ar dheis. Take the second turn on the right.
Téigh díreach ar aghaidh. Go straight on.
Téigh trasna an droichid. Go across the bridge.
Téigh síos go dtí an crosbhóthar. Go down to the crossroads.
In Irish, two words rather than one are often used to describe location:
os comhair	opposite
os cionn	above
ar chúl	behind

Nouns coming after these are put in the genitive case:
an siopa	the shop
os comhair an tsiopa	opposite the shop
an leabharlann	the library
ar chúl na leabharlainne	behind the library
DESCRIBING LOCATION
Tá sé ansin ar thaobh na láimhe clé. It's there on the left-hand side.
Tá sé anseo ar thaobh na láimhe deise. It's here on the right-hand side.
ar an choirnéal on the corner
os comhair an chaife opposite the café
ar chúl na leabharlainne behind the library
GIVING REASONS FOR NOT BEING ABLE TO HELP
Tá brón orm. Níl a fhios agam. I'm sorry, I don't know.
Níl barúil agam (cá bhfuil sé). I have no idea (where it is).
Ní as an cheantar seo mé. I'm not from this area.
LOCATION OR DIRECTION?
We've already come across some of the single words used in Irish to describe location:
thuas	up
thíos	down
thall	yonder/over there
amuigh	outside

The single words that describe direction can be divided into two groups:

(1)Words that describe movement away from the speaker:
Chuaigh sé ...	He went ...
suas	up
síos	down
anonn	over
amach	out
isteach	in

(2)Words that describe movement towards the speaker:
Tháinig sí ...	She came ...
aníos	up
anuas	down
anall	over
amach	out
isteach	in

When we last looked at directions, we came across the ordinal numbers an chéad (the first) and an deichiú (the tenth). Nouns beginning with a consonant (except d, n, t, l, or s) take a séimhiú after an chéad:
an chéad chrosbhóthar	the first crossroads
but	
an chéad tiontú	the first turn

Words beginning with a consonant don't change after the numbers an dara (the second) to an deichiú (the tenth):
an dara crosbhóthar

the second crossroads

Vowels that follow an dara to an deichiú, however, are preceded by h:
an dara háit	the second place
an séú háit	the sixth place
CEANN
As we saw in Aonad 22, the word ceann means 'head', but in certain contexts it can also mean 'one'.
an chéad cheann ar chlé the first one on the left
DÁTAÍ DATES
The ordinal numbers are also used when talking about dates.

an chéad lá de mhí Eanáir the first of January
(Literally the first day of the month of January)

Here is a complete list of the months of the year:
Eanaír	January
Feabhra	February
Márta	March
Aibreán	April
Bealtaine	May
Meitheamh	June
Iúil	July
Lúnasa	August
Meán Fómhair	September
Deireadh Fómhair	October
Samhain	November
Nollaig*	December

*The word Nollaig also means 'Christmas'.
The months in Irish are usualy preceded by the word mí (month), or by de mí (of the month) when a specific date is being mentioned:
mí Feabhra	February
an ceathrú lá de mhí feabhra	the fourth of February

This shorter version is also acceptable but it is less widely used:
an ceathrú lá d'fheabhra	the fourth of February
an chéad lá d'Aibreán	the first of April

Note how the following months change slightly after the word mí (month), or de mí:
An tríú lá de mhí an Mhárta
An ceathrú lá de mhí an Aibreáin
An cúigiú lá de mhí na Bealtaine
An séú lá de mhí an Mheithimh
An seachtú lá de mhí an Mheán Fómhair
An t-ochtú lá de mhí an Dheireadh Fómhair
An naoú lá de mhí na Samhna
An deichiú lá de mhí na Nollag
